>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 25:
GREAT EXPECTATIONS FOR HILLARY
CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP ON THE
EVE OF THEIR FIRST PRESIDENTIAL
DEBATE.
REACTIONS TO THE POLICE VIDEO OF
THE SHOOTING DEATH OF KEITH
SCOTT IN CHARLOTTE, NORTH
CAROLINA.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE C.E.O. WHO SLASHED HIS
SALARY AND GUARANTEED A $70,000
A YEAR MINIMUM WAGE TO HIS
EMPLOYEES.
>> A BUSINESS IS REALLY MISSING
ITS POTENTIAL IF IT SEES ITS
PURPOSE AS CREATING MONEY.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON "PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
HILLARY CLINTON AND DONALD TRUMP
ARE PREPARING FOR A SUPER-BOWL-
SIZED AUDIENCE IN THEIR FIRST
ONE-ON-ONE DEBATE SINCE BECOMING
THE MAJOR PARTY NOMINEES FOR
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
THE TV AUDIENCE FOR TOMORROW
NIGHT'S SHOWDOWN AT HOFSTRA
UNIVERSITY ON NEW YORK'S LONG
ISLAND IS EXPECTED TO TOP
100 MILLION, WITH THE CANDIDATES
FOCUSED ON THE SMALL PERCENTAGE
OF VOTERS WHO HAVE NOT MADE UP
THEIR MINDS.
IN AN "ABC NEWS-WASHINGTON POST"
POLL OF LIKELY VOTERS PUBLISHED
TODAY, CLINTON HELD A SLIGHT
ADVANTAGE OVER TRUMP, 46% TO
44%.
CLINTON AND TRUMP HAVE BEEN
HUNKERED DOWN WITH ADVISERS AND
BRIEFING BOOKS, BUT BOTH TOOK
TIME OUT TODAY TO MEET
SEPARATELY WITH ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, WHO
WAS IN NEW YORK FOR THE UNITED
NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY.
BOTH RUNNING MATES TODAY TALKED
ABOUT WHAT THEY EXPECT IN THE
DEBATE.
>> HE'S GOING TO FOCUS IN THIS
DEBATE TOMORROW NIGHT AS HE HAS
THROUGHOUT THIS ELECTION ON THE
ISSUES THE AMERICAN PEOPLE CARE
ABOUT.
I THINK THAT'S WHY YOU SEE THE
MOMENTUM IN THIS CAMPAIGN.
>> I THINK THE GREAT VIRTUE OF
THESE DEBATES IS YOU GET 90
MINUTES TO LOOK AT PEOPLE AND
REALLY SEE WHETHER THERE'S
DEPTH, WHETHER THERE'S
SUBSTANCE, AND WHETHER THERE'S
CANDOR AND TRUTHFULNESS IN WHAT
THEY SAY.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FROM SANTA BARBARA, CALIFORNIA,
TO TALK ABOUT WHAT THE FIRST
PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE IS "NEWSHOUR
WEEKEND" SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
JEFF GREENFIELD.
I'M HEARING SUPER BOWLESQUE
NUMBER POTENTIALS FOR THE
AUDIENCE THAT MIGHT BE WATCHING
THIS.
DO MOST OF US WAIT FOR THE THE
ONE LINERS, THE MOMENTS, THE
VERBAL AND NONVERBAL
COMMUNICATIONS OR ARE WE
ACTUALLY PAYING ATTENTION THE
WHOLE 90 MINUTES OR TWO HOURS,
OR WHATEVER IT IS?
>> CERTAINLY NOT JUST THE
AUDIENCE BUT THE ARMY OF
JOURNALISTS WAITED FOR THOSE
MOMENTS.
IF YOU ASK A JOURNALIST TO
RECITE THE HESS TREE OF
DE-- DEBATE, NIXON LOOKED
SHALLOW.
REAGAN SAID THERE YOU GO AGAIN.
DUKAKIS DIDN'T SEEM IT CARE IF
HIS WIFE WAS RAPED AND MURDER.
GEORGE H.W. BUSH LOOKED AT HIS
WATCH.
THAT IS WHAT ALWAYS MAKES THE
NEXT DAY'S STORIES.
BUT I THINK THAT OFTEN IT'S THE
ENTIRE 90 MINUTES THAT VIEWERS
TAKE AWAY, IF YOU THINK ABOUT
THE OBAMA-ROMNEY DEBATE FOUR
YEARS AGO, IT WASN'T ANY ONE
MOMENT THAT CAUSED PEOPLE TO SAY
ROMNEY HAD WON, IT WAS THE
OVERALL DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WHAT
SEEMED TO BE A KIND OF
DEFENSIVE, SOMETIMES PET YOU
LENT OBAMA AND VERY ASSURED IN
COMMAND ROMNEY.
SO THAT IS WHAT I THINK YOU NEED
TO PAY AS MUCH ATTENTION TO AS
THOSE MOMENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT
THAT LEVEL OF EXPECTATION WHEN
ROMNEY LOOKED PRESIDENTIAL AND
PERHAPS THE EXPECTATION FOR
DONALD TRUMP IS CAN HE LOOK
PRESIDENTIAL, CAN HE CONTAIN
HIMSELF FOR THIS PERIOD OF TIME,
IS THAT A DIFFERENT LEVEL OF
EXPECTATION WE HAVE FOR HIM THAN
SAY HILLARY CLINTON WHO HAS HAD
SUCH A LONG CAREER IN PUBLIC
SERVICE?
>> FIRST OF ALL, I'M DEVELOPING
AN APP WHICH WILL DELIVER A
NONLETHAL BUT PAINFUL SHOCK TO
ANY ANALYST THAT SAYS THEY HAVE
TO APPEAR PRESIDENTIAL.
YOU KNOW, I ALWAYS SUGGEST
SOMEONE SHOULD PUT ON 200 POUNDS
TO LOOK LIKE WILLIAM HOWARD
TAFT.
BUT MORE SERIOUSLY, I THINK
THERE IS A DANGER OF OVERSTATING
THE FACT THAT DONALD TRUMP IS SO
OUT OF THE MAINSTREAM OF
CANDIDATES, YOU KNOW, NOT ONLY
NO PUBLIC OFFICE BUT NO CIVIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT HE IS GOING TO
BE HELD TO A QUOTE LOWER
STANDARD.
I THINK-- I UNDERSTAND THE
POINT, BUT I DO THINK THAT 90
MINUTES ONE-ON-ONE WITH ONE OF
THESE TWO PEOPLE IS GOING TO BE
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
AND I'M NOT SURE THAT A
ONE-LINER OR A DISMISSIVE ANSWER
TO A QUESTION ABOUT THE
COMPLEXITIES OF SAY, DEALING
WITH NATO COUNTRIES UNDER ATTACK
IS GOING TO BE ENOUGH FOR HIM.
I THINK THAT IF HE AFTER 90
MINUTES CAN'T OFFER A COHERENT
ACCOUNT OF WHAT HE MEANS, THAT
IS GOING TO COST HIM.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU IN A
FORMER LIFE HAVE ALSO HELPED
CANDIDATES PREPARE FOR THESE
EVENTS.
GOING INTO IT, WHAT WOULD YOU
TELL BOTH OF THESE CANDIDATES
TODAY?
>> WELL, I HAVE TO SAY, I DO
THINK THAT I WOULD ADVISE
HILLARY CLINTON IT WOULD BE A
MUCH TOUGHER PIECE OF ADVICE
BECAUSE IT IS TRUE THAT WHAT
TRUMP IS-- I'M SURE IS BEING
TOLD IS PROVIDE AN ANSWER THAT
SUGGESTS YOU ARE FAMILIAR WITH
THE TOPIC, AND ALSO COUNTER HER
EXPERIENCE, THIS IS WHAT I ONCE
CALLED POLITICAL JUDO, TAKE THE
STRENGTH AS A WEAKNESS.
IF YOU ARE SO EXPERIENCED, WHY
DID YOU VOTE FOR THE WAR IN
IRAQ.
HOW DID WE MAKE SUCH A HASH OF
SYRIA AND LIBYA.
HER CHALLENGE, I THINK, WOULD BE
BOTH TO ACKNOWLEDGE IT, AND THEN
SAY ONE OF THE KEY THINGS YOU
NEED TO DO IS A PRESIDENT IS TO
LEARN FROM YOUR MISTAKES THE WAY
JOHN KENNEDY LEARNED AFTER THE
BAY OF PIGS NOT TO PUT TOO MUCH
TRUST IN THE MILITARY DURING THE
CUBAN NUCLEAR CRISIS.
AND TEN THURN IT.
I THINK SHE MIGHT ALL DIM
DONALD, YOU DON'T HAVE EVIDENCE
OF ADMITTING A MISS TACK, THAT
IS I BAD NOTION FOR BEING A
PRESIDENT.
IN THE CASE OF ADVISING HILLARY
CLINTON, THERE NEEDS TO BE THIS
FINE LINE BETWEEN TRYING TO
PROVE THAT SHE'S SMARTER THAN HE
IS, WHICH WOULD NOT BE THE RIGHT
WAY TO GO, AND THEN TAKE HIS
LACK OF KNOWLEDGE AND EXPLAIN
WHY THAT MATTERS.
THIS ISN'T JUST A CIVICS TEST.
IT IS ABOUT GOVERNING AS
PRESIDENT.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW ABOUT THE
ROLE OF MODERATOR.
WHAT SHOULD LESTER HOLD BE DOING
TOMORROW NIGHT.
>> IN TERMS OF LESTER HOLD, IT
IS A VERY DIFFICULT POSITION.
I THINK JIM LEHRER WAS RIGHT WHO
MODERATED MANY OF THESE DEBATES
SAYING THIS ISN'T AN INTERVIEW,
BECAUSE ARE YOU MODERATE A
DEBATE, WHAT YOU NEED TO DO IF
YOU THINK THAT DONALD TRUMP HAS
STEPPED WAY OVER THE LINE ON
FACTUAL MATTERS WHICH I THINK AS
A MATTER OF FACT HE HAS, THAT TO
HIS OPPONENT SAY WHAT IS YOUR
REACTION TO THAT SECRETARY
CLINTON.
IT IS NOT HIS JOB TO CORRECT
BECAUSE THEN YOU WIND UP
COMPLETELY YOU KNOW, UNSETTLING
THE WHOLE FRAMEWORK OF THE
DEBATE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWSHOUR
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JEFF
GREENFIELD JOINING US FROM SANTA
BARBARA, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> PLEASURE
YOU CAN WATCH EVERY PRESIDENTIAL
DEBATE SINCE 1960 AT
www.watchthedebates.org.
YOU'LL ALSO SEE HOW PAST GENERAL
ELECTION CANDIDATES ADDRESSED
ISSUES LIKE THE ECONOMY,
HEALTHCARE, AND GUN CONTROL.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ATTORNEY FOR
THE FAMILY OF KEITH SCOTT SAYS
POLICE VIDEOS RELEASED LAST
NIGHT PROVE SCOTT WASNOT ACTING
AGGRESSIVELY WHEN POLICE SHOT
HIM LAST WEEK IN THE PARKING LOT
OF HIS CHARLOTTE, NORTH
CAROLINA, APARTMENT COMPLEX.
POLICE CAR DASHBOARD CAMERA
VIDEO SHOWS SCOTT WITH HIS HANDS
AT HIS SIDE, TAKING FOUR STEPS
BACKWARD, WHEN HE IS SHOT.
THE OFFICER WHO FIRED FOUR SHOTS
AT SCOTT WAS NOT WEARING A BODY
CAMERA, SO HIS PERSPECTIVE
ISNOTSEEN IN ANY VIDEO.
CHARLOTTE POLICE CHIEF KERR
PUTNEY CONCEDES THE DASHCAM AND
BODY CAMERA VIDEO FROM ANOTHER
OFFICER ON THE SCENE DO NOT
OFFER PROOF THAT SCOTT WAS
ARMED.
BUT CHIEF PUTNEY SAYS SCOTT WAS
IN POSSESSION OF THIS HANDGUN,
WHICH, HE SAYS, HAS SCOTT'S
FINGERPRINTS AND D.N.A. ON IT.
CHIEF PUTNEY SAYS HE RELEASED
THE VIDEO IN THE INTEREST OF
TRANSPARENCY.
NORTH CAROLINA'S STATE BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION HAS TAKEN OVER THE
CASE.
JOINING ME NOW FOR SOME
PERSPECTIVE ON THE POLICE-
INVOLVED SHOOTING OF KEITH SCOTT
IN CHARLOTTE IS CARLA SHEDD, AN
ASSISTANT PROFESSOR OF SOCIOLOGY
AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN STUDIES AT
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY.
SHE IS ALSO THE AUTHOR OF
UNEQUAL CITY: RACE, SCHOOLS,
AND PERCEPTIONS OF INJUSTICE.
LAST NIGHT A LOT OF PEOPLE WERE
WAITING FOR SOME CLARITY SAYING
OKAY, WELL, THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT WOULD NOT HAVE SAID
THAT THEY WILL RELEASE THESE
THINGS UNLESS THE VIDEO IS ON
THEIR SIDE.
BUT IT WASN'T CONCLUSIVE.
>> I KNOW.
WE KEEP ASKING PEOPLE TO RELEASE
TAPES.
BUT YOU KNOW THAT THERE IS
SOMETHING ELSE GOING ON.
AND THIS LACK OF TRANSPARENCY, I
THINK IT'S PROBABLY MAKING THE
PUBLIC MUCH MORE UPSET BECAUSE
HE SHOWED THEM A PIECE OF IT
INSTEAD OF THE FULL THING.
IT JUST MUDDIES THE ISSUE EVEN
FURTHER AND I KNOW IT MAKES MORE
PEOPLE UPSET.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT DOES IT
DO TO THE FABRIC OF THE
COMMUNITY WHEN SOMETHING LIKE
THIS HAPPENS AND WHEN THERE IS
ESSENTIALLY A HEIGHTENED
TENSION, ESPECIALLY AROUND RACE.
>> WELL, I'VE BEEN STUDYING WHAT
I CALL THE CONTINUUM, THE
RANGE OF CONTACTS THAT PEOPLE
HAD WITH THE POLICE FROM JUST
BEING STOPPED AND ASKED
QUESTIONS TO BEING STOPPED AND
SEARCHED TO PERHAPS A DEADLY
ENCOUNTER WITH THE POLICE.
AND THE RANGE SAYS WOW, MY SIDE
OF THE STORY WASN'T TAKEN OR THE
POLICE RECORD WOULD NOT EVEN
REVEAL WHAT HAPPENED FROM MY
STANDPOINT, WE WERE ONLY GETTING
THEIR STANDPOINT.
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THERE ANY
THINGS AT ALL WORKING IN FRAMING
HOW A COMMUNITY APPROACHES
POLICE AND GETTING RESULTS
BECAUSE WE SAW VERY DIFFERENT
OUTCOMES IN TULSA, OKLAHOMA THAN
WE DID IN NORTH CAROLINA.
>> WELL, I THINK MEASURES OF
ACCOUNT ABILITY, THE VICTIMS OF
TULSA WAS THEY RELEASED-- THE
DIFFERENCE WAS THEY RELEASED THE
FOOTAGE EARLY IN TULSA.
THEY HAD A SENSE OF HERE IS MORE
DATA ABOUT WHAT WAS GOING ON.
IF WE HAVE PEOPLE WHO TALLY
HAVE CONNECTIONS TO POLICE
OFFICERS WHERE THEY KNOW THEM
FROM THE COMMUNITY, SO IT COMES
TO HAVING SOME STRONGER
CONNECTIONS AMONGST THE PEOPLE
AND BEING SEEN AS FULLY HUMAN
AND THAT ONE-TO-ONE REACH COULD,
YOU KNOW, SCALE UP TO A GENERAL
PERCEPTION OF TRUST.
BUT IT'S REALLY HARD TO DO THAT.
AND WE HAVE TO WORK FROM BOTH
ENDS IN CHANGING IN THE ONLY THE
CULTURE OF POLICING BUT THE
STRUCTURE OF INEQUALITY THAT
WOULD MAKE IT SO THAT POLICE ARE
THE FIRST PEOPLE THAT WE CALL,
AND SEE, THAT I AM RECOGNIZED
FULLY AS A PERSON.
>> IF ALL OF THE VIDEO OUT
THERE, DOES IT MAKE IT MORE
DIFFICULT FOR COMMUNITIES TO
ENGAGE IN A CONVERSATION OR DOES
IT FIRST-- WHAT DOES IT DO IN
THAT KIND OF LARGER CONTEXT
HAVING THESE INCREDIBLY
IMPASSIONED FLARE-UPS OCCUR?
>> THERE ARE NO DEFINITIVE
ACCOUNTS.
AND I THINK HAVING THE VIDEO
GIVES SOME SOL AS TO PEOPLE IN
SAYING THIS SHOULD BE AN
OBJECTIVE RECORD AND OFTEN IS
NOT.
BUT IT MEANS THAT WE ARE REALLY
GRASPING FOR SOMETHING TO SHOW
THAT THERE MIGHT BE A DIFFERENT
SIDE BECAUSE PEOPLE DON'T HAVE
GREAT TRUST IN WHAT IS THE
POLICE RECORD.
AND WHAT IS THE SORT OF SIDE OF
THAT-- THE OFFICERS.
SO EVEN WITH THE ADVANTAGE POINT
OF BODY CAMERAS, THIS COMES
WHERE YOU ARE SEEING IT FROM THE
POLICE'S VAN TAJ POINT.
IT'S NOT FROM THAT OTHER
CITIZEN'S VAN TAJ POINT.
AND I THINK WE CAN TAKE THAT
METAPHOR TO MEAN HOW DO WE GET
THE RECORD OF THE PEOPLE.
HOW DO WE UNDERSTAND THEIR
ACCOUNTS AND WHAT THEY GO
THROUGH.
>> Sreenivasan: CARLA SHEDD
FROM COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY, THANK
YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: A 20-YEAR-OLD
MAN IS EXPECTED TO MAKE HIS
FIRST COURT APPEARANCE TOMORROW
FOR ALLEGEDLY KILLING FIVE
PEOPLE IN A MALL IN WASHINGTON
STATE FRIDAY NIGHT.
POLICE ARRESTED ARCAN CETIN LAST
NIGHT ABOUT 24 HOURS AFTER HE
ALLEGEDLY OPENED FIRE INSIDE A
MACY'S STORE AT CASCADE MALL,
NEAR BURLINGTON, WASHINGTON, A
SMALL TOWN ABOUT 60 MILES NORTH
OF SEATTLE.
THE SHOOTING, CARRIED OUT WITH A
HUNTING RIFLE, BEGAN AT 7 P.M.
ALL OF THE VICTIMS HAD BEEN AT
OR NEAR THE MACY'S MAKEUP
COUNTER.
CETIN, A PERMANENT U.S. RESIDENT
FROM TURKEY, WAS ARRESTED,
UNARMED, WALKING ON THE STREET
ABOUT 30 MILES FROM THE MALL.
AT AN EMERGENCY MEETING OF THE
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL
TODAY, THE U.N. SPECIAL ENVOY TO
SYRIA SAID RENEWED GOVERNMENT
AIRSTRIKES ON THE REBEL-HELD
HALF OF ALEPPO, ONCE SYRIA'S
LARGEST CITY, MAY AMOUNT TO A
WAR CRIME.
THE BRITAIN-BASED "SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS"
SAYS MORE THAN 200 PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN KILLED BY AIRSTRIKES IN
ALEPPO SINCE A CEASEFIRE
BROKERED BY THE U.S. AND RUSSIA
FELL APART LAST WEEK.
AT THE U.N., THE FOREIGN
MINISTERS OF BRITAIN AND FRANCE
BLAMED RUSSIA, WHICH SUPPORTS
SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR ASSAD,
FOR PROLONGING THE FIVE-AND-
HALF-YEAR-OLD CIVIL WAR.
A BROAD COALITION OF REBEL
GROUPS TODAY DENOUNCED
INTERNATIONAL NEGOTIATIONS FOR
PEACE IN SYRIA AS "MEANINGLESS."
U.S. AMBASSADOR TO THE U.N.
SAMANTHA POWER SAID ASSAD'S
ACTIONS IN ALEPPO AMOUNTED TO
BARBARISM.
INDIA WILL RATIFY THE LANDMARK
CLIMATE CHANGE ACCORD AGREED TO
IN PARIS LAST DECEMBER.
PRIME MINISTER NARENDRA MODI
SAID TODAY INDIA WILL DO SO ON
OCTOBER 2nd, BECAUSE IT IS THE
ANNIVERSARY OF THE BIRTH OF
MAHATMA GANDHI, CONSIDERED THE
FATHER OF MODERN INDIA AND
SOMEONE WHO FAMOUSLY LIVED WITH
A LOW CARBON FOOTPRINT.
INDIA IS THE WORLD'S THIRD-MOST
PROLIFIC EMITTER OF PLANET-
WARMING CARBON DIOXIDE GAS.
ITS DECISION TO IMPLEMENT THE
PARIS ACCORD FOLLOWS THE
ANNOUNCEMENT BY PRESIDENT OBAMA
AND PRESIDENT XI OF CHINA
EARLIER THIS MONTH, THAT THE
U.S. AND CHINA, THE WORLD'S
WORST CARBON EMITTERS, WILL
ADOPT THE ACCORD, TOO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE AVERAGE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER IN
CORPORATE AMERICA EARNS MORE
THAN 300 TIMES THE PAY OF THE
AVERAGE WORKER.
THAT'S JUST ONE OF MANY
STATISTICS THAT POINTS TO THE
GROWING INCOME INEQUALITY
BETWEEN THE RICH AND THE POOR IN
THE U.S.
IT HAS BEEN ON THE RISE SINCE
THE 1970'S AND BECOME AN ISSUE
IN THIS YEAR'S PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN.
LAST YEAR, THE RELATIVELY YOUNG
C.E.O. OF A PRIVATELY-HELD
COMPANY, WHO DOES NOT NEED TO
ANSWER TO PUBLIC SHAREHOLDERS,
DECIDED TO TURN THAT
COMPENSATION EQUATION ON ITS
HEAD.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
"NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT JOHN LARSON LOOKS
INTO WHY.
PORTIONS THIS STORY AIRED
PREVIOUSLY ON THE PUBLIC
TELEVISION PROGRAM "RELIGION AND
ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY."
THIS STORY IS PART OF OUR SERIES
ON POVERTY, JOBS, AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA, "CHASING
THE DREAM."
>> GRAVITY PAYMENTS, THIS IS
KORRINE.
>> Reporter: ABOUT A YEAR-AND-A-
HALF AGO, LIFE CHANGED FOR THE
100 EMPLOYEES OF GRAVITY
PAYMENTS IN SEATTLE WHEN THEIR
BOSS, DAN PRICE, ANNOUNCED THE
COMPANY'S MINIMUM WAGE WOULD
JUMP TO $70,000 A YEAR.
>> EFFECTIVELY IMMEDIATELY, WE
ARE GOING TO PUT A SCALED POLICY
INTO PLACE, AND WE ARE GOING TO
HAVE A MINIMUM $70,000 PAY RATE
FOR EVERYONE THAT WORKS HERE.
>> Reporter: THE HIKES WOULD BE
PHASED IN.
A $50,000 A YEAR MINIMUM WAGE
TOOK EFFECT IMMEDIATELY, AND
WOULD RISE TO $60,000 BY THE END
OF 2016, AND $70,000 IN 2017.
PRICE SAID HE'D HELP PAY FOR THE
INCREASES BY SLASHING HIS OWN
$1 MILLION A YEAR COMPENSATION
BY MORE THAN 90% TO $70,000.
>> I'M CURIOUS IF ANYONE HAS ANY
QUESTIONS?
>> Reporter: STORIES OF HIS
ANNOUNCEMENT WENT VIRAL.
>> EVERYONE IS GETTING A RAISE
AT A SEATTLE-BASED COMPANY.
>> ONE BOSS JUST CHANGED THE
LIVES OF HIS EMPLOYEES.
>> Reporter: ONE OF SIX KIDS,
HOMESCHOOLED IN AN EVANGELICAL
FAMILY IN IDAHO, PRICE WAS A
MEMBER OF A LOCAL CHRISTIAN ROCK
BAND UNTIL HE WAS 16.
AND THAT'S WHEN, WITH ASSISTANCE
FROM HIS DAD, HE HELPED A LOCAL
COFFEE HOUSE OWNER WITH HER
CREDIT CARD PROCESSING, THE FEES
CHARGED BY BANKS AND CREDIT CARD
COMPANIES EACH TIME HER
CUSTOMERS USED A CARD.
>> I WAS ABLE TO GET HER COSTS
LOWERED, AND IT WAS A GOOD
EXPERIENCE FOR HER.
ALL OF A SUDDEN I HAD A
REFERENCE.
>> Reporter: PRICE PARLAYED THAT
REFERENCE AND A PASSION FOR
HELPING SMALL BUSINESSES INTO
HUNDREDS OF CLIENTS AND CREATED
HIS COMPANY.
BY HIS EARLY 20s, HE WAS GETTING
RICH, BUT GROWING INCREASINGLY
TROUBLED BY WHAT HE CALLED
EXTREME INCOME INEQUALITY IN THE
UNITED STATES.
>> FRANKLY, THE REALITY WAS
DISTURBING, BUT THE TREND WAS
EVEN MORE DISTURBING.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
WASHINGTON CENTER FOR EQUITABLE
GROWTH, THE AVERAGE INCOME OF
THE NATION'S TOP 1% OF FAMILIES
LAST YEAR WAS ABOUT
$1.4 MILLION, WHILE THE AVERAGE
INCOME OF THE BOTTOM 99% OF
FAMILIES WAS $49,000 A YEAR.
>> WHEN YOU CREATE A SOCIETY
THAT HAS SO MUCH INEQUALITY,
WHERE THE RICH AND THE POOR HAVE
A DIVIDE THAT IS HUNDREDS OF
TIMES OVER.
TO ME THE WAY WE WERE GOING
EVERYBODY WAS GOING TO BE HURT.
>> Reporter: ALL THIS WAS
HAPPENING AT A TIME WHEN THE
COST OF LIVING HERE IN SEATTLE
WAS SKYROCKETING.
THE COST OF HOUSING, ESPECIALLY
RENT, WAS GOING UP SO FAST THAT
MANY MEDIUM AND LOWER INCOME
FAMILIES COULDN'T AFFORD IT.
TWO YEARS AGO, SEATTLE VOTERS
APPROVED GRADUALLY RAISING THE
LOCAL MINIMUM WAGE FROM $10 TO
$15 AN HOUR, THE FIRST MAJOR
AMERICAN CITY TO DO SO.
A STUDY PUBLISHED IN JULY BY THE
UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON FOUND
THE CITY'S LOWEST-PAID WORKERS
EXPERIENCED A SIGNIFICANT
INCREASE IN WAGES.
WHICH IS PRECISELY THE EFFECT
PRICE WANTED FOR HIS STAFF, AND
THEN SOME.
>> GRAVITY PAYMENTS, THIS IS
ALYSSA.
>> Reporter: ALYSSA O'NEAL, A
SINGLE MOM, USED TO MAKE $21,000
A YEAR BEFORE COMING TO GRAVITY
PAYMENTS.
NOW SHE MAKES ALMOST $60,000 AS
A CUSTOMER SUPPORT
REPRESENTATIVE.
SHE'S PAID OFF HER CAR LOAN,
CREDIT CARD DEBT, AND MOVED INTO
A BETTER HOME.
>> IT'S SOMETHING I NEVER COULD
HAVE IMAGINED.
>> LET ME SEE IF I CAN FIND THAT
FOR YOU.
>> Reporter: KORINNE WARD, IN
CUSTOMER SUPPORT, USED TO HAVE A
LONG COMMUTE.
NOW SHE CAN AFFORD TO LIVE CLOSE
ENOUGH TO WALK TO WORK.
>> AND I'M ABLE TO AFFORD THE
COST OF LIVING IN SEATTLE, WHICH
IS INCREDIBLE.
>> Reporter: MANY EMPLOYEES TOLD
ME THEY NOW FEEL SECURE ENOUGH
FINANCIALLY TO START FAMILIES.
>> HE'S DUE ON OCTOBER 12, AND
HE'S A MALE, A BOY, YES!
>> Reporter: TYPICALLY THE
COMPANY HAD ONE OR TWO EMPLOYEE
PREGNANCIES EACH YEAR, NOW?
SEVEN OR EIGHT.
>> OUR DAUGHTER, LAYLEE ROSE,
SHE'S 11 WEEKS OLD TODAY.
>> Reporter: SOME PROCLAIMED
PRICE "THE BEST BOSS IN
AMERICA," BUT IN PROTEST OF THE
MINIMUM WAGE POLICY, SOME HIGHER
PAID EMPLOYEES QUIT, AND A FEW
CLIENTS DROPPED THE COMPANY'S
SERVICE.
CONSERVATIVE TALK SHOW HOST RUSH
LIMBAUGH PREDICTED PRICE'S
DOWNFALL.
>> THIS IS PURE, UNADULTERATED
SOCIALISM, WHICH HAS NEVER
WORKED.
THAT'S WHY I HOPE THIS COMPANY
IS A CASE STUDY IN M.B.A.
PROGRAMS ON HOW SOCIALISM
DOESN'T WORK, BECAUSE IT'S GOING
TO FAIL.
>> Reporter: TURNS OUT, HARVARD
BUSINESS SCHOOL DID STUDY PRICE
FOR CLASS DISCUSSION.
IT FOUND THE $70,000 MINIMUM
WAGE ANNOUNCEMENT GENERATED NOT
ONLY A FLOOD OF JOB APPLICANTS,
BUT MANY NEW CLIENTS.
AND, AS FOR LIMBAUGH'S
PREDICTION ABOUT PRICE'S
COMPANY?
>> HE STILL HAS TO HOLD HIS
BREATH, BECAUSE IT HASN'T
FAILED, I THINK ON BALANCE IT'S
PROSPERED.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, GRAVITY
PAYMENTS NOW REPORTS COMPANY
REVENUE HAS GROWN BY 75%, AND
ITS NUMBER OF NEW CLIENTS HAS
RISEN 67%.
>> SOME OF THEIR SUCCESS MIGHT
BE ATTRIBUTED TO INCREASED
PRODUCTIVITY ON THE PART OF THE
WORKERS, WHO FEEL RESPECTED AND
UNDERSTAND THEY ARE GOING TO
HAVE A HARD TIME FINDING ANOTHER
JOB THAT PAYS SO WELL, BUT IT
ALSO HAS GENERATED A LOT OF
PUBLICITY, AND THAT HAS BEEN
GOOD IN TERMS OF PULLING IN
BUSINESS.
>> MANGOES, PEACHES, NECTARINES,
CHERRIES, YES, MA'AM?
>> Reporter: CLIENTS LIKE SOSIOS
PRODUCE IN SEATTLE'S PIKE PLACE
MARKET PREDICT AS LONG AS
GRAVITY PAYMENTS OFFERS GOOD
SERVICE AND LOW COST, CLIENTS
WON'T CARE ABOUT THEIR HIGH
MINIMUM WAGE.
>> TO ME, IF THEY'RE RUNNING
THEIR BUSINESS IN A WAY THAT
THEIR STAFF FEEL BETTER ABOUT
BEING PART OF THE COMPANY, WORK
HARDER WITH THEIR CUSTOMERS, TO
ME AS A VENDOR, THAT'S A GOOD
THING.
>> Reporter: AND IF YOU GET A
SENSE THAT THESE HIGHER WAGES
SOMEHOW RAISE YOUR BILL?
>> THEN WE'LL HAVE A
CONVERSATION.
>> WELL, THERE WAS A COLLEAGUE
OF MINE YEARS AGO WHO TAUGHT
THAT OUR MISSION AT THE HARVARD
BUSINESS SCHOOL OUGHT TO BE TO
TEACH PEOPLE TO MAKE A DECENT
PROFIT DECENTLY.
THERE ARE LOTS OF FORCES IN THE
WORLD THAT MAY OVERPOWER THAT OR
MAY MAKE IT DIFFICULT, BUT IT'S
NICE TO SEE THESE EXAMPLES OF
PEOPLE WHO CAN SWIM AGAINST THAT
TIDE.
>> Reporter: WHICH MAY BE ONE
REASON WHY PRICE'S EMPLOYEES
AGREED TO BUY HIM A GIFT.
>> WE HAD TRIED TO THINK OF A
WAY THAT WE COULD THANK DAN FOR
WHAT HE'S DONE FOR US.
>> Reporter: A LITTLE PAYBACK?
>> A LITTLE PAYBACK, YEAH.
>> Reporter: CUSTOMER SUPPORT
REPRESENTATIVE ALYSSA O'NEAL GOT
THE IDEA ROLLING.
>> WE HAVE ONE MORE GIFT FOR
YOU.
IT'S OUTSIDE THOUGH.
>> Reporter: SHE CONVINCED THE
OTHER EMPLOYEES TO ALL CHIP IN
AND IN JULY THEY BOUGHT HIM A
TESLA MODEL S WORTH ALMOST
$90,000.
>> ARE YOU KIDDING ME?
>> WHEN IT HAPPENED, IT WAS LIKE
IT WAS MEANT TO BE.
>> OH MY GOSH!
>> I WAS REALLY SURPRISED BY HIS
REACTION.
>> THANK YOU!
>> HE SAID, "I DON'T WANT TO
EVEN SEE THE CAR, I WANT TO SEE
YOU GUYS."
AND HE TURNED AROUND AND HUGGED
EVERYBODY AND MADE SURE HE
HUGGED EVERYBODY FIRST BEFORE
GETTING IN THE CAR AND TOUCHING
IT.
>> Reporter: SO YOU HAD SORT OF
A CRUSH ON THIS CAR FOR A LONG
TIME AND NEVER THOUGHT YOU'D
HAVE ONE?
>> I THOUGHT I'D HAVE ONE ONE
DAY, BUT YOU EVER HAVE ONE OF
THOSE GOALS WHERE YOU SAY IT'S
THREE YEARS OR TWO YEARS, BUT IT
NEVER BECOMES ONE YEAR, IT'S
ALWAYS THREE YEARS? AND THREE
YEARS GOES BY, AND IT'S STILL
THREE YEARS?
IT WAS KIND OF ONE OF THOSE
DEALS.
>> Reporter: SINCE HIS PROMISE
OF A $70,000 A YEAR MINIMUM
WAGE, HIGHER PROFILE COMPANIES
LIKE STARBUCKS AND WAL-MART HAVE
RAISED THEIR MINIMUM WAGE TOO,
THOUGH NONE NEARLY AS MUCH.
IF THERE IS AN ETHIC, WHAT IS
IT?
>> I THINK IT'S ' WHAT'S YOUR
PURPOSE?
AND BUSINESS IS REALLY MISSING
ITS POTENTIAL, IF IT SEES ITS
PURPOSE AS CREATING MONEY.
IT SHOULD HAVE SOME LARGER
PURPOSE.
I THINK IT'S A RECIPE FOR A
BETTER LIFE AND MORE SUCCESS IN
BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: PRICE SAYS FOR NOW
HE WANTS TO LIVE MODESTLY, GROW
HIS COMPANY FOR HIS CLIENTS AND
EMPLOYEES AND SEE TO WHAT DEGREE
OTHER COMPANIES FOLLOW SUIT.
>> THE TRUTH IS I'M STILL TRYING
TO FIGURE ALL THIS OUT.
>> Reporter: AND, WE ARE SITTING
INSIDE A TESLA
>> AND WE ARE SITTING INSIDE A
TESLA, AND I'M DOING MY BEST TO
TRY TO DECONSTRUCT WHAT I THINK
HERE AS A 32-YEAR-OLD GUY WHO
HAS A LOT MORE TO LEARN.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: WITHIN THE NEXT
YEAR, THE FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION EXPECTS 600,000
DRONES TO BE USED COMMERCIALLY
IN THE UNITED STATES.
GLOBALLY, THE COMMERCIAL DRONE
MARKET IS PREDICTED TO REACH
$127 BILLION BY 2020.
HOWEVER, NOT ALL OF THE DRONES
IN THE SKY ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
THERE, AS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S"
CHRISTOPHER BOOKER EXPLAINS.
>> Reporter: POLICE IN THE
NETHERLANDS ARE TAKING A UNIQUE
APPROACH TOWARD UNWANTED AND
POTENTIALLY UNSAFE DRONES.
THEY ARE THE FIRST IN THE WORLD
TO USE BIRDS TO HUNT AND CATCH
DRONES THAT ARE BEING USED
ILLEGALLY.
THESE EAGLES ARE TRAINED TO SEE
THE DRONES AS PREY.
USING THEIR HUNTING INSTINCT,
THEY INTERCEPT THE DEVICE MID-
AIR, AND CARRY IT TO A SAFE
LANDING PLACE.
THEY ARE REWARDED WITH A PIECE
OF MEAT AFTER EACH SUCCESSFUL
CAPTURE.
THE EAGLES SUCCESSFULLY BROUGHT
DOWN THE DRONES 80% OF THE TIME.
NOW THEY WILL BEGIN DEPLOYING
EAGLES TO CAPTURE DRONES THAT
POSE A POTENTIAL DANGER,
INCLUDING WHEN THEY FLY IN
RESTRICTED AIR SPACE, TOO CLOSE
TO AIRPORTS, OR DURING VISITS
FROM DIGNITARIES.
THE DUTCH POLICE SAY THAT NONE
OF THE BIRDS WERE HARMED DURING
THE TESTING, BUT THEY CONTINUE
TO MONITOR ANY POSSIBLE IMPACT
ON THE TALONS OF THE EAGLES.
AND THEY ARE COMMISSIONING
SPECIAL CLAW PROTECTORS THAT
WILL HELP FURTHER PREVENT
INJURIES TO THE EAGLES WHEN THEY
INTERCEPT LARGER DRONES.
>> UP UNTIL NOW, OUR ONLY OPTION
HAS BEEN TO TRY TO FIND THE
DRONE OPERATOR, THE PILOT, BUT
IT CAN BE VERY HARD TO FIND THAT
PERSON.
IT CAN TAKE A LONG TIME AND
THAT'S WHY YOU WANT TO HAVE THE
ABILITY TO CAPTURE THE DEVICE
YOURSELF.
ABOUT 100 OFFICERS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WILL BE TRAINED TO USE
THE BIRDS.
FOR NOW, THESE DRONE HUNTERS ARE
BEING PROVIDED AND TRAINED BY A
PRIVATE COMPANY.
BUT THE DUTCH POLICE ARE
COMMITTED TO THE PLAN AND HAVE
EVEN BEGUN TO RAISE THEIR OWN
SEA EAGLE CHICKS.
THEY EXPECT TO HAVE THEIR OWN
FLYING SQUAD TRAINED AND HUNTING
DRONES BY NEXT SUMMER.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, MAJOR
LEAGUE BASEBALL IS MOURNING THE
DEATH OF MIAMI MARLINS ALL-STAR
PITCHER JOSE FERNANDEZ, HE DIED
EARLY THIS MORNING WHEN THE
FISHING BOAT HE WAS RIDING IN
CRASHED AT A HIGH RATE OF SPEED
INTO A JETTY.
TWO OTHERS DIED IN THE ACCIDENT.
FERNANDEZ, A 24-YEAR-OLD FROM
CUBA WAS THE NATIONAL LEAGUE
ROOKIE OF THE YEAR IN 2013.
TOMORROW ON THE NEWSHOUR SPECIAL
LIVE COVERAGE OF THE FIRST
CLINTON AND TRUMP DEBATE.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.